in this video we are going to introduce
and run some docker commands this video
is mainly practical as we will explore
the docker file to package and deploy a
simple web application look at the
Python code to create the application
and execute the docker commands to build
the docker image and run the docker
container we are not using Jenkins in
this video but all the commands we
introduce here will be part of the CD
pipeline we are building in the next
videos the only prerequisite is to
install docker on your machine as we
will not cover this during the demo for
time reasons here is the link to install
a docker on your favorite operating
system and platform there are currently
two versions of docker a community
Edition and an Enterprise Edition the
community edition is fine for this video
let's move swiftly to the demo part
where we will analyze together a docker
file explore the Python code for the web
application and explain and execute
commands to build the docker image and
run the docker container this is a
simple docker file to build a Python web
application the daka file is a script
containing a sequence of commands to
assemble a docker image in other words
the docker file contains the
instructions to build the docker image
if you are familiar with shell scripting
you will soon recognize many commands
but don't worry if you don't I will
explain the docker file line-by-line
also there is no need to copy it
manually although it is a good exercise
because all the code is available on the
companion repository on github and the
section underscore for code CD and the
school pipeline docker file the code is
adapted from an excellent official
docker tutorial have a look at it if you
want to play more with docker the first
line of code is the underlying base
image upon which our docker images based
these uses the latest available version
of Alpine at the time this video was
shot Alpine is a lightweight linux
distribution
this line installs Python three and pip
using apk which is a package manager for
the alpine Linux distribution it is
similar to up get or yum if you are
familiar with other Linux distributions
this line copies the requirements dot
txt file from the current directory into
the directory user has a see up inside
the docker container note that we need
to copy this file from our local machine
into the docker container otherwise
docker won't be able to find it let's
have a look at requirements dot txt
which is located in the same directory
of the daka file this is a simple text
file containing the name and the version
of the Python module we need to install
here we are using flask which is a
popular framework for building web
applications in Python that's one of the
dependencies we need in order to build
our web application
let's go back to the dockerfile and
continue from where we left
this line installs the modules listed in
the requirements dot txt file hence
flask using pip which is the package
manager for installing Python modules
note that we have to specify the path to
the file inside the docker container
this is why we had to copy it in the
previous line these lines copied the
files
up dot pi and index dot HTML inside the
templates directory into the docker
container in specific directories let's
have a look at these files
ha dot pi is a Python file that uses the
flask web framework for building a
simple web application it imports flask
and ran that template from the flask
module it also imports the random module
there is no need to specify this module
in the requirements dot txt as it is
included by default in the Python
standard library we use this module to
generate a random gif of a cat this line
initiates a flask application this line
creates a list named images containing
URLs of gif images of cats taken from
the BuzzFeed web site if you want you
can customize this list with more gifts
of cats this line defines an application
route and maps the route slash in other
words the route of localhost or domain
name to the function index
these function stores inside the URL
variable the URL of the cat gif you can
see here that we are using the random
module to pick up a URL from the images
list
finally the function invokes the render
template to render the template stored
in index dot HTML and passes the URL
variable to this template we will look
at the template in a minute
the render template page is then
returned by the function when the user
invokes the homepage of the web
application this last line is used to
run the application on the current host
localhost in our case or a domain name
if the application is deployed to a
server accessible via DNS 0.0.0.0 means
the application is reachable from all
the IP addresses on the local machine
now let's look at the template invoked
in this line it is stored locally inside
the templates directory let's open index
dot HTML this is a simple HTML file with
some CSS in it and it is used as a
template for the home page of our web
application the interesting part is
inside the div class container in here
we find the URL variable that it is
passed to the template embedding the gif
image now let's go back to the docker
file and continue from where we left
this line exposes port 5,000 inside the
container by default this is the port
where the flask application is served so
we need to open it inside the container
finally the last line of the docker file
contains the command to run the
application through a Python our next
step is to build the docker image
remember the difference between docker
image and docker container we made in
the previous video
the dockerfile is the recipe for our
application and we need to build it in
order to generate a docker image of the
web application once we have the docker
image we can run the docker container
which is a concrete instance of the
docker image so let's start by checking
out the code from the companion github
repository run this git clone command
and wait until it downloads the whole
repository
then CD into hands-on Jenkins then see
the intersection and the school for /
code / CD and the school pipeline this
is the directory where the docker file
and the Python code is stored
now let's build the docker image from
the docker file this is the command to
build the docker image I assume you
already have docker installed if you are
on Mac OS or Linux and you're running
docker commands from a user who is not
part of the docker group you need to
prefix this command with sudo otherwise
you will get an error I will show you
how to add a user to the docker group in
the next video as we need to do it for
Jenkins docker build is the command to
build the docker image the minus T flag
allows to talk the docker image in this
case I'm tagging it as hands on Jenkins
slash my app but you can give it any tag
name you want the dot means that the
docker file is expected to be in the
current directory now let's run the
docker build command the first time you
run it it will take some time because
docker needs to pull the base image of
Alpine Linux from the docker hub
repository for the first time as well as
all the other dependencies like Python
and so on next time you run it you will
notice the docker can cache previous
layers if they have not changed wait
until docker downloads all the image
layers and give you a successful
execution
we now have a docker image you can check
that the image has been created via the
docker images command and then grapping
the tag name let's run the docker
container which is as we saw previously
a concrete instance of a docker image
this is done via the docker run command
again bear in mind that you need to run
this command with so though if the
current user is not part of the docker
group otherwise you'll get an error
message let's explain this command
docker run is the command to run a
docker container the - P option Maps the
port on the container 5002 the port on
localhost 8888 you remember that in our
docket file we expose port 5000 which is
the default port to access the Python
flask application here we remap port
5000 so that the web application is
accessible on local host on port 8888
why do we do that we can leave port 5000
and it would be fine but I want to show
you how to remap ports so that we can
run the dev environment on port 8888 and
later on the staging environment on port
88 and the production environment on
port 80 the next option is - - name this
option gives a friendly name to our
docker container if you don't give a
name docker will automatically assign a
random name often a funny one
the next argument is the name of the
docker image that we built before note
that there is a difference between the
name of the docker image here hands-on
Jenkins
/my app and the name of the docker
container here my app to reuse the
object oriented analogy you can have
multiple containers running and we left
them in the next videos as you usually
have multiple objects however you
usually have a single image as in object
oriented programming you have a single
class associated to multiple running
objects
now let's run the command you can see
the locks of the container showing up
now go to your favorite browser and head
to localhost column 8888 and voila how a
web application with cat gifts is
running refresh the page few times to
check that it works properly go back to
the command line and notice the logs
displaying the request for each refresh
when you finish playing with the web app
or got bored of watching cats make sure
you stop the container by pressing
together control C this is the end of
this video where we looked at the daka
file and the python code for the web
application and executed docker commands
watch the next video where we will
create the steps in the CD pipeline to
build and deploy to a development
environment